The whole
approach to oceanography, once the needs to
describe the ocean and to find where to go to see
what was happening, has caused the oceanographic
programs and the intergovernmental and
international sense to take on a whole new aspect.
And we're beginning to look at the oceans now more
and more as what the hell has man done to the oceans?
And so we have organizations like GESAMP,
G-E-S-A-M-P, which is a multiple nation group
looking at other pollutants in the ocean. The
GIPME, which is the Global Investigations of
Marine Pollution, So we're beginning to
recognize that the oceans as some place to
distribute our waste are not the, what, well,
their capacity to absorb is finite. We used to
think, hell, the ocean is so big and the dilution
factor is so great and they're so deep. Let's not
worry. Well, we begin to realize that isn't the
case anymore. I have some questions to ask about
pollution, and I have a couple of other questions
to ask first, too, and I think I'll probably do them
in this order. A
hypothetical question, since you've always been
involved in... international cooperation. It
seems to the outsider that international
cooperation will soon be essentially a thing of
the past. That 200-mile limits, underdeveloped
nations being concerned about exploitations of
their resources that you can't separate economic
and physical oceanography.
These kinds of problems will increase tensions
between between nations involved in
oceanography and be pushed back into our own
coastal shores. Would you comment on that rather
long question? I'd be less than truthful if I
didn't indicate that there are other political
overtones. We first became, or I first became
aware of these as a result of activities of what was
called the Group of 77. This was a group of 77
developing nations, the nations of the third
world, who wanted the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission
to look at their problems in terms of training,
education, mutual assistance, to help them bring
their technology up to other levels of the
developed country. They weren't about to listen
to problems relating to increasing pollution in
the ocean. They said, look, you guys brought your
technology up to a level that you have a high
standard of living and by so doing you've had an
impact on the ocean, albeit inadvertent. Now you
don't want us to become technologically advanced
because we would increase the level of the impact
on the ocean and the atmosphere. So that became one
of the underlying problems in the
intergovernmental and international
cooperation, and I think is still there. It's not
just in oceanography, it's in housing, it's in
health, it's in a number of the areas of the United
Nations technical families. What about in this
country? Certainly here, in terms of group
tensions. You know, how do you purify the
environment if in cleaning up the environment you
leave the minorities out? I don't know that that is
so much of a national problem.
I feel that maybe it was more in the past than it is
now. But I think the problems of the nation are such
that all the groups are beginning to work together
and say, what can we do to clean it up a bit? But you
suggested in terms of international cooperation
that sometimes in the distant, and by distant I
mean far distant future. In terms of? In terms of
cooperation in oceanography towards. Well, I
think the cooperation is still there, but I think
that
cooperation now requires one to pay a price. There
was a time when I used to go to sea when I used to be
responsible for ships going to sea, that the State
Department would get you the clearance to work
around the Marquesas Islands, Tumultu, Society
Islands in the Pacific, coast of Brazil, coast
of West Africa. And if you didn't get the approval,
you simply went did your oceanographic research.
Nobody ever really said anything. If you knew the
people, as we most often did, we would have their
scientists on board. Then the research began to
get a little more sophisticated in terms of
looking for oil and gas resources or doing
geophysical research, let me put it that way. the
type of research that one can make
interpretations on the presence or absence of oil
and gas research, we began to become more
sophisticated in the studies of the life history,
of the distribution, the availability of the
living resources, shrimp, the tunas, the other
fishes. And the developing nations began to
realize that because they didn't have the ships
and sophisticated research capabilities that
they damn well may be losing out. So they said, OK,
if you want to do research in our area, then you seek
permission from our government. And I can
remember receiving from both Mexico and Brazil
beautifully signed agreements or the Geronimo
and the Undaunted out of our lab in Miami, we would
carry one naval officer and two scientists on our
ships the whole time we were in their territorial
waters. And we would agree to provide copies of all
data and aliquot portions of all samples to their
scientists. Their territorial waters now are 200
miles. That's right. In those days, it was 3 miles
and 12 miles. It was kind of vague when you're doing
research in the Caribbean or off of the Gulf of
Mexico. And it worked out. We said, sure, we'd love
to have you on board. I don't recall a time that it
didn't work out to our mutual advantage. We were
more concerned about the oceans, the tunas. They
didn't catch the tunas. Our nation did, the
Japanese did, but the Brazilians didn't catch the
tunas. The people from Colombia and Mexico, they
were interested in the shrimp, the conch,
sardines.
But not with the law of the sea convention. And ever
since our friend from Malta proposed that the
non-living resources on and under the seabed were
the property of all men, all nations. And any
monetary
return from exploitation of these resources
should go into an international pot for
distribution among the third world. We've been
having more of the political overtones. You've
got to remember the proportion of the developing
nations in the UN compared to the so-called
developed nations. There's about 161 developing
nations who have equal vote to the United States or
Canada or the USSR or France or Japan or any of the
more developed nations. But you also can have
problems between developed nations and
developed nations. There's been almost a war
between Iceland and Great Britain over the
control of fishing. What is that going to do to
international cooperation? Oh, in the long run, I
can't answer that. Certainly it does throw a
glitch into it, as NASA would say. After all, we
have... our problems with Canada. Where is the
boundary between the United States and Canada out
200 miles? That's not really been settled. Whose
fish are we fishing when we catch the salmon? Are
the Japanese, when they catch the salmon west of
the 180th meridian, catching Bristol Bay salmon,
are those our fish or their fish? After the war, the
policy of abstention held, and they could not fish
east of 172 degrees east. Well, we had just won a
war, so we said, thou shalt not, and they didn't.
They became stronger and stronger, and they did
more and more research, and I can remember to this
day the meeting that was held, and they said, show
us that the fish we are catching East of 172 degrees
east are yours. Show us for good, sound research.
And we couldn't do it. So they said, then no longer
will we accept the policy of abstention.
The 200-mile fisheries extended zone So far,
March the 1st to March the 18th, it seems to be
working reasonably well. The other vessels are
here. They have permits. They have quotas.
Insofar as I know, we have had only one incident
with one vessel, one nation in this time out of the
several hundreds that are here. What this abodes
for the future, I don't know. Our own fishermen
aren't very happy about it. But I think they've got
to accept the fact that fishery resources have
some kind of a maximum sustained yield. And if
we're a long way under that, then the policy is that
the other nations with quotas may fish.
Okay. Now, I want to drop back more to some
chronological questions right now. Okay. The
last time we were talking, you had arrived at, or
sort of obliquely had arrived at, back into this
country, if I may mean the continental part of the
country, where you become involved with... the
biological laboratory first in D.C., then in
Miami, and then back in D.C. And you said that the
same ideas that appeared for 10 years, it was sort
of time for you to come back. What new ideas did you
bring back now to the laboratory work in Miami and
in Washington? I don't know if there were so much
new ideas as they were the application to the
tropical Atlantic of what I learned concerning
the biology, distribution, abundance, the other
words concerning the tunas, because there was a
tuna fishery developing in the Atlantic. They
were mostly
the vessels from Japan, Yugoslavia, Spain, and
our west coast tuna vessels did not have anything
to do in the off season. And you don't make any money
tied up at the dock. So we proposed to develop a tuna
fishery in the Gulf of Guinea.
And it would be developed with the idea that the
West Coast clippers could come over there in the
off season. So the first season they came over, as a
result of the work of our lab in Miami, they caught
24,000 tons of tuna. So we achieved at least one of
the goals that the lab in Miami set out to do. Mr.
McKernan made a commitment to the Organization of
African Unity, the OAU, that the beer commercial
fisheries of Department of Interior at that time,
the United States, would undertake a major
research effort in the tropical Atlantic and that
to house the people and the ships and all of this
that he would give up a major lab in Miami or in the
southeast and that was the job I was asked to
undertake. So we converted a building here in the
Navy Yard, brought together the staff, got the two
big ex-Navy sea-going tugs, the Geronimo and the
Undaunted, got the appropriation bill through to
build a lab in Miami, hired the architect, built
the building, moved to Miami,
The week we hit there, Hurricane Betsy hit at the
same time. So it was an auspicious beginning.
And
we brought some people there from Hawaii who had
had experience, both on the ship and in terms of the
fishermen. We brought some of the Hawaiian and
Japanese fishermen over with us. So as to bringing
anything new, we brought essentially tried and
proven techniques into the ocean of the areas of
the world.
It was fun. And after you've succeeded reasonably
well at this goal, then you come back to
Washington? Is there any reason why? Yeah. Two
reasons. First I got a call, would I consider
coming to Washington to take over as the director
of the National Oceanographic Data Center? I
said, no way, living here on Virginia, Key
Biscayne, beautiful new big home, three minutes
from the office, through a lovely park along the
beach. The more I got to thinking about it, we had
our new lab, we had a superb staff, two big ships,
good ongoing program. And I guess a little of the
fun had gone. The challenge was gone. And so I
called and said, OK. So I was asked to come up for an
interview. And I took on the job of
director of the National Oceanographic Data
Center. And I stayed there until NOAA was formed,
when Dr. White asked me if I would come on as other
director of EDS. The exception of Hawaii, I've
never stayed in a job much longer than five years.
This job, I've been here now six years. I still
enjoy getting up every day, but some of the
challenge is gone. It's a good organization.
They're superb people. There must be some more
problems someplace else. Had you always been
interested in the environment and pollution? Is
that the way you explain moving in here? You're
not, okay. The job I'm in now, of course, relates to
environmental data and information,
description of the environment.
Oh, I had to learn an awful lot in a hurry because as
an oceanographer I didn't know very much about the
bloom blowers and the meteorology. The
meteorologists are the bloom blowers and the
oceanographers the bottle dunkers. But it's
become really exciting because we have developed
very large databases and information bases. And
Dr. White about three years ago said, now I want you
to begin using them. We formed a center for
climatic and environmental assessment, for
instance. And they're concerned with developing
models for yield of wheat, corn, soybeans. That's
in our center in Columbia, Missouri. And then next
door is the assessment Division and their
responsibility every day is to look at the
satellite imagery and the weather patterns and
the development of the droughts and or the floods
and or snowpack and look at the implications and
probabilities that we will for instance if you
look right now in our west at the soil moisture
you'll find that in many places it's 40% of the
normal. Now, what is the probability of bringing
it up as a result of rainfall between now and
germination of the wheat? Probability is all the
way down there. The odds are we're not going to get
it. Now, when you think of the lowest snowpack in
history, the Rockies, What's that going to do to
the irrigation? What's that going to do to
hydroelectric power? It's a little frightening,
actually. We spent a good bit of time working on gas
utilization of the natural gas as a function of
degree days. 65 degrees is generally the
temperature above which you begin to think about
air conditioning. below which you begin to think
about heating. So 63 degrees would be two degree
days heating degree. 68 degrees would be three air
conditioning days. So you can use degree days as a
measure of the climate to look at gas consumption,
oil consumption, corn yields, and so forth. So we
now have... Models for the United States, Canada,
Argentina, Australia, New Zealand, People's
Republic of China, USSR. And we, every day, can
make an assessment through various satellites
and other techniques. Success of germination,
aerial extent of drought, I don't want to
delay you very long, but I do want to have the
answers to these. This trip in Washington has been
sort of a revelation to me in one way. And almost in
every case, everybody to whom I've asked this
question has been very enthusiastic about their
work in Washington. Have you ever been sorry about
having joined the bureaucracy? I always come
back. As they say, no matter where I've gone, my
wife and I love it here. Has the work with
government generally been exciting
intellectually for you? Have you ever had any
conflicts with, let's say, the military in your
early career in terms of What direction your
research or activities should go? Oh, not that we
haven't easily resolved. No, I have had some. No,
no, no, I can't say I've had, because there have
been some times that I've argued about, for
instance, the classification of oceanographic
data, but I must say in all fairness that the amount
of oceanographic data that the military have
classified is very small. And in almost every case
such classification has been with good cause
because it's national security. There are times
that a scientist, and I not really can classify
myself as a scientist in the same framework as a
monk or I'm
a descriptive oceanographer and an ecologist.
There are times we think, or did think, before I
learned more, that classification was
ridiculous. Well, it isn't. There are times it's a
necessity, and it's in the best interest of our
nation to do it. Now, the next series of questions I
want to ask before you leave concerns really
pollution and the ocean. Your work as an
ecologist. Are you optimistic about pollution
and the ocean? Well, I'm always optimistic, sure.
And I don't mean that in a naive sense. Our nation
works on almost a principle of a pendulum. You see,
we overhear and then we begin to... pollute the
oceans or the atmosphere the streams and the lakes
and our people begin to react they begin to realize
and then we're over here and they say okay now
that's got to come to a screeching halt so we will
begin to spend our hard earned money to swing the
pendulum back and it's a very strange but very
successful type of government that we have there
isn't a A better one in the world, as strange as it
is. So when people say, for example, the Red Sea or
the Mediterranean Sea are dying... I think it's
overstated. Yeah, I do. I think it's a degree of
scare tactics that brings results. That's... I
think you understand what I mean. If you can get
people to react, they're going to overcome
problems. If you can't get them to react, the
problems will increase in magnitude. Are you
optimistic about mariculture and aquaculture?
Yes. Feeding the starving millions, or whatever
that means.
I don't know that one needs to be optimistic or not
optimistic. If the demand is there, we can do it.
For instance, when I was in Hawaii, I was involved
in aquaculture with the tilapia. This is an
Asiatic fish that is a mouth breeder. When the
mother opens the mouth, hundreds of little ones go
in the mouth, and she closes her mouth. And the
tails are sticking out. They're the cutest damn
things. But you put those in a rice paddy, and they
will grow up very rapidly. and they will turn an
awful lot of material and the bottom muds and rice
paddies and ponds into protein to beautiful,
clean, white fish. Just like the carp. I don't mean
the carp, I mean the catfish. When I worked in
Miami, I worked a lot with a man in St. Pete. who we
called Catfish because he was trying to convince
the people as a result of the work of Swingle and
Smith that all of the bayous and the ponds in
Louisiana and Texas and Mississippi, they should
rear catfish because people couldn't afford the
damn things. They were so expensive, and yet
they're so easy to grow. They convert material
into protein so readily, so the potential is
there. But the economics are not. That's why you
raise the pompano. That's why you raise
northwestern United States of the salmon.
Shirley Temple Black's husband is one of the
leaders in that area. That's why you raise shrimp.
That's why you raise oysters. Because these have a
large dollar value where carp and i mean catfish
and tilapia don't so if people get hungry enough if
the economics adjust that's a problem
i'm not saying we know enough yet to do it you say
feed the starving people of the world fish protein
concentrate. This is a superb example where we had
an ideal opportunity. One little plastic package
of fish protein concentrate on a bowl of rice would
give a person their total daily protein
requirement. Okay, what good is that going to do if
you bring it in on the dock any place in a West
African country or Java or a bangledash. You've
got to get it back where the people are. Okay, how do
you get it there? There are no trains. There are no
roads. There are the rivers, but you can't get up
the rivers. Fish protein concentrate you could
have dropped from airplanes in these little
packages. How do you convince the people to eat?
You've got to get somebody in there to educate them
that if they would sprinkle the magical white
powder on the rice or the... What's the great big
crinulated green ball-like vegetable that grows
in other tropics? Anyway, it was a beautiful
thing. But our nation would not market it,
although it was shown without a doubt to be 100%
pure, odorless, because the fish hadn't guts.
Then we tried to export it. And immediately the
nations who are not quite as friendly with us as we
would like said, ha-ha, you won't let your own
people eat it, but you'll send it over here to the
developing countries to get rid of it. So as a
result, the market went shook to distribution,
education, and politics.